In a small town in Ohio, behind layers
of barbed wire fence and many warnings
of danger,
there are about 11,000 holes in the
ground.
And these giant things, which are
turning out an exciting new type of
nuclear fuel called HALEU.
>> Three tablespoons of HALEU is enough to
supply a typical person's entire use of
electricity for their entire lifetime.
>> The private company behind this new fuel
production wants to fill all those
11,000 holes with centrifuges. Right
now, they've built 16.
It's the kind of ambitious goal that
only makes sense if an industry that's
been on life support suddenly has a
nuclear renaissance.
>> Nuclear renaissance.
>> Big tech is bringing nuclear power back
in a big way.
>> President Trump has laid out a target of
quadrupling the US's nuclear capacity.
>> We're talking hundreds of billions of
dollars.
>> We will build a reactor a year again. We
will build them across the country.
>> This is no longer about just
electricity. It's about India's future.
>> China is outpacing the United States by
at least a decade.
>> And this new fuel may be crucial to
power a new wave of smaller reactors
that can be deployed in more places to
help power the future of technology.
>> Amazon and Google, meanwhile, are
investing in small modular reactors.
>> I think in the next 6 7 years, I think
you're going to see a whole bunch of
small nuclear reactors.
>> But supplying this fuel gets tricky.
>> Nuclear reactors run on uranium. And
it's not just uranium you dig out of the
ground. They have this very complicated
process where they have to enrich the
uranium into nuclear fuel.
>> And the need for nuclear fuel is
growing. By some estimates, the global
uranium demand is expected to more than
double by 2040.
>> Far and away the biggest company
involved in the nuclear fuel ecosystem
is Russia's Rosatom. They control almost
50% of the capacity to enrich uranium.
>> But due to sanctions against Russia over
its war in Ukraine, the world's uranium
market is transforming. And since the
nuclear ecosystem is interconnected,
Western countries are being forced to
rewrite their entire nuclear supply
chains, from mining, conversion,
enrichment, and fabrication to building
all those small reactors. Success at
each link can mean more than new fuel.
It could grow new industries and the
potential to rake in lots and lots of
money.
And failure wouldn't just mean these
holes in the ground stay empty. It could
cause a crack in nuclear confidence that
could take generations to seal.
>> All right.
>> So
>> Yeah, push that. Make it in. That might
be hard.
>> Is it my nails?
>> Maybe. Try Try going sideways.
>> That's funny.
>> There you go. You're going to drive rods
in and you're going to try to keep that
number close to that number. So, go
ahead.
Now you're a nuclear operator.
>> This is a simulator of reactor one at
California's Diablo Canyon power plant.
And the trainee working the joystick is
a Brazilian fashion model turned nuclear
influencer named Isabelle Boemeke. Or
for those deeply into the nuclear energy
space on TikTok, she's known as Isodope.
>> This is a plant. No, not this one. This
one.
>> A small MODULAR REACTOR.
>> WHAT IS MY PURPOSE?
>> I STARTED MAKING SHORT, 1-minute-long
videos that were very abstract and I
also try to make it very fun.
>> She's not alone. In the last few years,
there's been a rise in so-called nuke
fluencers. Some critics note that this
new wave of snappy short-form social
media advocacy can gloss over nuanced
positions from anti-nuclear groups like
Greenpeace.
>> We don't need nuclear energy. It's still
dangerous and polluting.
>> But Bemeki is not your average nuke
fluencer. She's reportedly invested in a
nuclear startup and is married to Joe
Gebbia, co-founder of Airbnb and Donald
Trump's chief design officer. The two
have donated millions to nuclear causes.
This rise in social media influence
comes at the same time the nuclear power
industry and some Silicon Valley
startups are pushing the Trump
administration to help kickstart
development. And according to her own
account, Bemeki was able to provide
input on draft executive orders
targeting the regulation of nuclear
energy.
This renewed push is a major change in
the trajectory of nuclear power in the
United States.
>> San Onofre nuclear plant is shutting
down for good.
>> Crystal River nuclear power plant now
set to close for good.
>> Closed for good.
>> for good.
>> For good.
>> I've been writing about nuclear energy
since 2019. And when I started, pretty
much the only story, especially in the
US, was which one is going to close down
next.
>> From permits to labor to concrete,
building and operating a nuclear plant
can cost a fortune long before it
produces a single watt. And the road to
operation can be unpredictable.
The two newest reactors built in the US
at Southern Company's Vogtle plant in
Georgia came online seven years behind
schedule and more than 16 billion
dollars over budget.
At the same time, solar energy has
gotten much cheaper to produce and a lot
more reliable to build and operate.
But then all these unmarked, windowless
buildings started popping up everywhere.
>> The big tech companies started saying,
"We need to build out these huge data
centers for artificial intelligence."
And the thing about AI is those data
centers need a lot of electricity. And
so, they started looking at nuclear
power.
>> Meanwhile, the operating license for
California's last nuclear power plant
was about to expire.
>> So, at the same time, Diablo Canyon in
California was also on the chopping
block.
>> This whole county is
>> This time, it was a confluence of
economic concerns and activism, pushing
against the proposed closure.
>> We had a giant blimp rolling through the
streets.
>> We're on A MISSION
>> TO STOP ALL EMISSIONS.
>> TO THE SURPRISE OF literally everybody,
the plant is open at least until 2030.
>> That's not all. Other decommissioned
plants are getting a new lifeline, like
Three Mile Island. Now, Constellation
Energy is actively working to reopen one
of its reactors under a new name, the
Crane Clean Energy Center.
>> Changing the name, really? You cannot
erase history. You cannot rebrand a
nuclear disaster.
>> And still, global investment in nuclear
energy since 2020 is estimated to be
around $300 billion
with ambitious plans in Europe, North
America, and Asia to revive or kickstart
their nuclear energy sectors.
Every step of the supply chain, from
mining to enrichment to building
reactors, is highly regulated and
controlled because a single misstep
could be catastrophic and erode the
public trust nuclear has worked decades
to regain.
>> It's a real shift from when I came of
age and everyone was worried about
nuclear war because the process of
enriching uranium for nuclear fuel, same
technology that they use for enriching
uranium to make nuclear weapons.
>> It also means that turning a lump of
rock like this into enough electricity
to power all of this is complicated.
Let's break it down.
Uranium ore contains three unique
isotopes. U-234
accounts for less than 0.01%.
So, let's just forget about that one.
U-238, on the other hand, makes up most
of it, 99.3%.
But, the key to nuclear energy lies
within this one, lucky number U-235.
Meaning, only about 0.7% is the fissile
type of uranium.
For now, this thing is basically a
gamma-emitting rock.
So, let's turn it into fuel.
>> You need to first convert the ore into
yellowcake, distinguished by its color
and fluffy composition, similar to cake.
>> That stuff is then sent to a conversion
facility, where it's converted into this
gas, uranium hexafluoride.
>> To make the fuel, you take the gas for a
spin in a centrifuge. Inside the
whirlwind, the lighter U-235 atoms
slowly separate from the heavier U-238
ones.
>> So, they go through the centrifuges
until the U-235 is at about a 5%
concentration.
>> If you keep things cooking for longer,
you'll reach weapons grade, which is 90%
or more.
>> And that's really tightly regulated.
>> So, let's take it out before then.
>> That uranium hexafluoride gas is sent to
another facility, where it can be turned
into metallic form.
>> And then pressed into pellets, each
about the size of a gummy bear, then
stacked into rods and loaded into
nuclear reactor cores.
This is where we finally get energy
through the form of nuclear fission.
U-235 isotopes split, which makes heat,
which boils water, which shoots through
a turbine, which makes energy.
It's like activating a secret Rube
Goldberg machine every time you turn on
the AC.
Oh, there's also the matter of
radioactive nuclear waste, which we'll
put off to deal with later, just like
the real thing.
For companies chasing the next big
uranium boom, every link in this chain
looks like an opportunity, starting from
the ground up.
>> Now, this sound going off
is telling us we're seeing lots of
counts per second here, very high counts
per second at 65,000 plus. Now, that is
some high-scale, high-grade
uranium mineralization.
>> Rook 1 is an underground uranium mining
project from NexGen, targeting the Arrow
deposit in Saskatchewan's Athabasca
Basin.
>> The Arrow deposit is the world's
largest, highest-grade uranium mining
project, and we'll be producing
approximately 20 to 25% of the world's
mined supply.
>> It hasn't begun production yet, but if
you want to check out the site, Leigh
Curyer, the founder and CEO of NexGen,
is happy to give you directions.
>> It's 700 km north-northwest of
Saskatoon, 155 km north of the nearest
municipal and reservation of La Loche
and the Clearwater River Dene Nation.
>> But even if you're lucky enough to find
an underground treasure trove of uranium
ore, you can't just grab a shovel and
start digging it up. First, you need to
raise a lot of capital.
Rook 1, for example, costs around $1.5
billion.
And then there's the paperwork, like
licenses, permits, and sign-offs from
surrounding indigenous communities,
which make up around 13% of Athabasca
County.
>> You're looking basically from discovery
of Arrow to likely first pound of
production, 20-plus years.
>> But even before entering the
construction phase, NextGen is already
negotiating deals with utilities in the
US, Europe, Asia, and the Middle East.
Pulling uranium from the earth is no
small feat or small expense.
But, the real challenge begins when you
try to separate those pesky U-235
isotopes.
Uranium enrichment is also one of the
most tightly controlled
capital-intensive processes on earth.
It's chemistry, physics, and geopolitics
all in one spin cycle.
This should look familiar.
>> We assemble the centrifuges behind us,
then we take them down this transfer
corridor.
>> And you got these massive doors?
>> Yes. Uh, we call them King Kong doors.
>> The speed demon behind the wheel is Matt
Snyder, a former mechanic in the nuclear
navy and a 15-year veteran at Centrus,
the only US company licensed to make
HALEU, a concentrated type of nuclear
fuel.
>> They've got this enormous facility with
16 centrifuges running, and then holes
in the ground where they're going to
have the rest.
>> They plan to jam-pack this place with
11,000 centrifuges so they can scale up
their HALEU production to power a future
market of new nuclear reactors.
>> It really struck me how this is starting
to happen, but it's not here yet.
>> Standard nuclear fuel is called
low-enriched uranium, or LEU, and has a
U-235 enrichment concentration of 3 to
5%. HALEU is more potent. It's about
20%.
>> Three tablespoons of HALEU is enough to
supply a typical person's entire use of
electricity for their entire lifetime.
>> Right now, only Russia and China are
making HALEU at commercial scale.
>> So, if we were to expand our operations
with those 11,000 machines. That's
enough to meet the demand left by the
Russian sanctions.
>> The US Department of Energy awarded
Centrus, along with two other fuel
makers, $900 million. But the centrifuge
forest
But the centrifuge forest wouldn't grow
overnight.
>> With appropriate funding, we expect our
full capacity plant to be built within
the next 6 to 7 years.
>> How long does it take to to enrich the
uranium hexafluoride?
>> I can't I can't go into that.
>> Because centrifuges can also make
weapons-grade fuel, many topics around
the technology are classified.
>> I can't really comment. I can't answer
that.
>> I can't talk about that.
>> Uh
can't really comment.
>> So, let me try to get into this next
part without revealing any national
security secrets.
Betting on HALO also means betting on
the next-generation reactors that plan
to use it, like many SMRs, small modular
reactors, that can be built in
factories, shipped, and assembled on
site.
>> If you are looking at some of the more
ambitious SMR ideas, like placing small
reactors in the wilds of northern Canada
to supply power for remote towns, you
want to use HALO, as the thinking goes,
so that the number of refueling trips
out can be reduced, and that therefore
would drive down the cost of operation.
>> We'll get into the economics of SMRs a
bit later, though. Hang tight.
>> It's a chicken and an egg problem. They
can't have the fuel unless there's
demand. But there's no demand until they
have reactors, but they don't want to
build the reactors unless they know that
there's going to be fuel. You can see
where I'm going here.
>> The chicken and egg problem is being
solved at a small scale right now.
Urenco has committed to invest in new
HALO production. Orano in France has as
well. The next stage is whether there
are enough companies that can go beyond
a first-of-a-kind SMR model and actually
begin serial production.
>> One company outside of Seattle is
looking to become that first SMR chicken
or SMR egg or whichever one comes next.
TerraPower is a nuclear technology
company founded by Bill Gates in 2008.
Their first SMR, called Natrium, is
currently under construction in
Kemmerer, Wyoming. If all goes to plan,
it could be the first SMR to go online
in the US.
>> If you looked at the 90-plus reactors
that are operating in the US today or or
the 400 around the world, they were born
and designed in slide rule space and in
the space of paper drawings, but our
reactors started their development in an
advanced computing environment.
>> The CEO of TerraPower, Chris Levesque,
has spent 30 years in the nuclear
industry, beginning his career as an
officer in the nuclear navy.
>> Uh sorry with the background noise. I'm
having a little hard time hearing you.
Yeah.
>> Oh, sorry. Was just giving you a quick
introduction.
>> Part of the reason I have trouble
hearing is I spent too much time in
engine rooms uh in in uh submarines, but
you know, Bill knew he wanted to work on
the next form of vision, you know, which
for us is our Natrium reactor.
>> Natrium outputs around a third of the
electricity of a standard nuclear
reactor or more when it taps into its
molten salt storage tank, otherwise
known as energy island, which sort of
acts like a thermal battery.
Each generation of reactor is built on
the lessons of the past.
Reactors from the 1950s and 1960s are
often called Gen 1 reactors. Many were
small, unreliable, and had a number of
design flaws like inadequate or
non-existing containment structures,
inefficient fuel management, and a heavy
dependence on manual control.
Next came Gen II reactors, built between
the 1970s and the 1990s. They were more
efficient and built for commercial scale
and global deployment.
Gen II featured safety upgrades like
automated emergency shutdown mechanisms,
but equipment failure and human error
led to accidents at Three Mile Island in
Pennsylvania and Chernobyl in the USSR.
Reactors from the 1990s and beyond are
called Gen III and feature simplified
designs, better fuel efficiency, and
improved safety systems.
>> The next generation of nuclear power
plants, there's going to be Gen III
plus. And what that is is pretty much a
smaller version of what we've got now.
After Gen III plus is going to come Gen
IV. Those are different. There's a lot
of different designs people are working
with. There's different cooling
materials, they use different fuels like
HALO, but Gen III plus and Gen IV,
they're all generally what we call SMRs.
That's a small modular reactor.
>> Some experts estimate that SMRs will be
less expensive per kilowatt than their
predecessors, while others argue that
first-of-a-kind risks, high maintenance
requirements, and regulatory hurdles
will ultimately make them more costly.
>> Large nuclear reactors have been
optimized over decades to bring down the
cost of generating electricity. And
because SMRs are smaller, the amount of
energy that they will be able to
generate inside of their machines will
be smaller on a per kilowatt-hour basis,
meaning the economics will be
challenging. Obviously, SMRs imply
there's going to be more nuclear
reactors at more sites, which means more
regulation, more people to operate them.
Those are all things that raise the cost
of SMRs potentially.
>> Another hurdle with SMRs is there are a
lot of different design ideas, but they
won't all survive nuclear selection.
>> The amount of SMR designs has grown to
about 127 today from just about 80 a few
years ago.
>> Natrium was initially slated to go
online in 2028. However, the company was
delayed 2 years due to a lack of Halo,
but they found a solution.
>> That new source for the first core load
is going to be a company called ASP in
South Africa. It's a US Nasdaq-listed
company, but the enrichment operations
will occur in South Africa.
>> So far, TerraPower says it has received
$2 billion from the US DOE and raised
another $1.4 billion in private capital.
>> I grew up in New Hampshire where
Seabrook Nuclear Station was was being
built when I was growing up, and you
know, my parents who live paycheck to
paycheck, on their electric bill, they
had something called the Seabrook
surcharge. So, the ratepayers were
literally paying for the CapEx of that
first nuclear plant. That's not going to
work in the US today.
>> So, rather than ratepayers subsidizing
utilities reactors, a new shift could
see private capital footing that massive
bill, including the influx of tech
investment, which could take financial
burden off of taxpayers while putting
control of the country's nuclear power
in the hands of the private sector.
In addition to Wyoming, TerraPower says
it's also signed preliminary agreements
with utilities in Utah, Kansas, and the
UK, and many other SMRs in both the US
and Europe are in promising stages of
development.
Still, there's a hidden cost that comes
with hundreds of small reactors being
deployed around the world. Just like
larger reactors, SMRs create radioactive
material when the fuel becomes depleted.
More SMRs deployed globally means more
nuclear waste piling up in temporary
storage around the world. And currently,
there's no long-term solution for where
to put the stuff.
>> If you go to any nuclear power plant, if
you go out back, you're going to see
these giant steel and concrete casks.
And inside them is the spent fuel rods,
and those things are deadly. They'll be
deadly for a thousand years.
>> Some SMR developers claim their reactors
will eventually recycle up to 96% of
their spent fuel. But even a little bit
of nuclear waste exposure could do
irreparable harm to the ecosystem, water
supply, food chain, and cause long-term
health effects.
And ironically, many SMRs, due to their
compact designs, could actually produce
more nuclear waste per unit of
electricity than their larger reactor
counterparts.
>> In Europe and the US, they have got to
relearn some of the skills that have
been atrophying over the past decades,
but there's no reason that they cannot
overcome the challenge.
Whether nuclear power is going to
increase from 20% of generation in the
US to 30% or 40% of generation in the
future is largely a function of other
technologies. It's a function of whether
gas frackers are going to be willing to
forego market share of their product.
It's going to be a function of whether
we find new ways of making cheap
batteries to store wind or solar power.
>> It's going to take a few years, but by
the early 2030s, I'm pretty confident
we're going to have more nuclear power
plants and more different nuclear
technologies in operation.
>> There's real momentum behind nuclear
right now. Money, attention, ambition,
social media influence.
But, this is an industry that moves
famously slow with enormous bills that
pile fast.
And if the newly forming uranium supply
chain begins to topple, the whole
nuclear renaissance could collapse.
So, for all its promise, the path to
true energy independence remains
anything but certain.